Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts! Over one-third of the world’s food is lost or wasted, undermining efforts to end hunger and malnutrition while contributing 8 to 10 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions. In low- and middle-income countries, over 40 percent of food loss occurs before a crop even makes it to market, whether due to inadequate storage in hot or humid climates, pests or microbes, spoilage, spillage in transport or otherwise. Eliminating food loss and waste (FLW) would provide enough food to feed two billion people, as well as reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Addressing FLW is critical to global food security, nutrition and climate change mitigation. In order to raise awareness, exchange information and share success stories, USAID’s Food Loss and Waste Community of Practice created the USAID’s Kitchen Sink: A Food Loss and Waste Podcast. Our goal is to share monthly, bite-sized episodes that highlight USAID’s and the U.S. government’s approaches to FLW and provide a resource for those interested in what FLW is, why we should care and how we can reduce it. Our latest episode with Jacob Ricker-Gilbert, Wyatt Pracht and Patrick Ketiem of the Feed the Future Food Processing and Post-Harvest Handling Innovation Lab (FPIL) explores the role of youth in reducing FLW. The speakers share findings from a recent project conducted in Kenya, an area where youth unemployment and smallholder farmers lacking access to agricultural inputs are two major challenges. To try and address these issues, the project conducted a randomized control trial with agricultural youth clubs to train 397 youths in business concepts, FLW reduction management and gender considerations. Youth were also linked with agricultural input suppliers and provided the opportunity to sell postharvest inputs that included hermetic bags and low-cost moisture meters called hygrometers. The study increased access to inputs that help reduce FLW and increased incomes of certain youth. The median youth who participated in the project gained an additional $10 monthly income. For more information, read the recent blog from FPIL. You can subscribe to receive the latest episodes of USAID’s Kitchen Sink and listen to our original four episodes on the platform of your choice: Apple, Spotify and more! Video recordings of the episodes are available on YouTube. Check in every month for new episodes with experts from around the world to discuss FLW and methane emissions, the role of youth in addressing FLW, the economic costs of FLW, case studies from USAID Missions and more. If you have an idea for an episode topic you’d like to see featured or if you would like to participate in an episode of USAID’s Kitchen Sink, please reach out to Nika Larian (nlarian@usaid.gov). There’s no time to waste! This work was funded in whole or part by the USAID Bureau for Resilience and Food Security under Agreement #AID-OAA-L-12-00003  as part of FPIL.