This post is submitted by Peggy Ozias-Akins, University of Georgia. Seed innovation was on display at the 30th Annual Plant and Animal Genome (PAG) Conference in San Diego, CA, in January.  A diverse panel from academia and industry shared thoughts on the latest technology and the opportunities and challenges of genomic tools and genome editing for under-served crops and geographies around the world. Their workshop:  “Genomic technologies are needed for the intractable problems of African crop production,” hosted by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). Technology for agriculture has never been more needed given the fragile global food security situation we currently face. Putin’s war in Ukraine and the impacts of climate change have aggravated an already fragile global food security situation. In November, the United Nations Climate Conference, known widely as “COP27” (27th Convening of the Parties), included reaffirmation of commitments to limit temperature rise and increased support for finance and technology to mitigate and adapt to climate change.  And in December, nearly 190 countries approved a United Nations agreement at “COP15” in Montreal to protect 30 percent of the planet’s lands and oceans by 2030 (“30 x 30”) and includes multiple efforts to protect biodiversity. Developing and delivering to farmers new and improved, more resilient varieties and hybrids are among the best investments for climate change adaptation and mitigation, conservation of biodiversity and increasing food security.  New breeding technologies are available that contribute to this delivery, but will these technologies be made more available to African scientists and for African cropping systems? Achieving food security and the grand plans of COP27 and COP15 are only aspirational if the global scientific community is unable to use all the tools and technology available. Tef (Eragrostis tef), sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and peanuts (Arachis hypogaea) are crops cited as examples at the workshop that are now benefiting from the latest technologies. “Genomic tools,” including high throughput geno- and pheno-typing, genome sequencing, integrated data management, CRISPR gene editing, plant transformation and regeneration were reviewed for how these technologies represent the natural evolution of modern plant breeding and are being applied for greater breeding predictability, efficiency, and the means for plant breeders and agronomists anywhere to deliver more productive, climate resilient varieties in diverse agro-ecological zones around the world. The tools discussed at the workshop create efficiencies in several ways by: Panelists identified challenges to greater uptake and utilization, which include the difficulties of plant transformation and genome editing, developing and sharing thorough sequence information, maintaining functioning, well-supplied labs in Africa, inadequate funding, and lack of political will to create an enabling environment including difficulties in shipping experimental materials from one country to another. Based on the messages delivered by the workshop participants, science is persisting and progress is being made: Greater crop productivity, quality and resilience in the face of climate change, not just in the Western Hemisphere, but around the world and including Africa, is within reach. The tools, technology, and scientists are in place. Demand-led, locally-led research initiatives are gaining ground. The private sector has been sharing technology. Greater alignment from governments on policy, regulatory and investment in public sector research are needed to turn the corner and create greater value at both the scientific and farmer levels. History has demonstrated that science persists and makes our lives better. With greater global coordination and alignment of public investment, research with an international focus can be leveraged for national benefit, which creates a beneficial feedback loop of value and opportunity for both the public and private sectors. An environment that allows science to not just persist, but flourish, is within reach.